---
categories: bitcoin
date: "2025-06-28T00:00:00Z"
title: A Sysadmins Guide to Bitcoin
draft: false
---

I thought this post might be a change of pace. I think there is a general misunderstanding of Bitcoin and what it is. I thought I might try and make it relatable to people in tech. 

# Bitcoin Origin

Before we start, a few facts that will help set the scene.
- Bitcoin is the first ever Cryptocurrency. A cryptocurrecny is something that can act as digital money
- There are only ever going to be 21,000,000 Bitcoin, ever. Currently 19,000,000 are in circulation
- It was released as a spec via a white paper on October 31st 2008
- The author was somebody called Satoshi Nakamoto. Nobody knows who this person is and we will perhaps never know
- The first Bitcoin was created January 3rd 2009
- The network has never been hacked
- All the Bitcoin in the world is now worth over $2 trillion (more than Google!)

# Basic Overview

Given this, why is it worth over $2 trillion in only 17 years? It is really a few innovations melded together things that have come together to make a solution that gives us decentralised digital money. This is an innovation because digital mooney has a few problems;
- You need a balance on a database (bank)
- Somebody controls the supply of money (government)
- You need a way to send money to people (payment system)

It is inherently centralised, controlled by a government, and requires a bank. Given that the internet is free and open, couldn't we do the same with money?

# Blockchain

Bitcoin solves these issues. 
- Instead of a bank with your balance we have the shared blockchain (bank)
- Money in the system is created based on a mathematical formula (government)
- You can send bitcoin to anyone on the network via transactions (payment system)

And so why is this innovative? Well, the blockchain is distributed across the world across thousands of machines. Anyone can download a copy and run a Bitcoin node. And anyone can make a wallet on the blockchain (its a private key) and send money to anyone else (public key). 


## Bitcoins Value

The first thing to know is that there will only ever be 21,000,000 bitcoin. 21 million. The number is kind of arbitary because bitcoin can also be divided 100,000,000 times, and these are called satoshis. So half a bitcoin is 50,000,000 satoshis. 

The next interesting aspect, is that bitcoin is realeased on a schedule. Computers mine bitcoin by processing transactions, and solving a mathematical problem. If one miner solves the problem, they are rewarded with Bitcoin. When the network first started, the reward was 50 bitcoin. Every 4 years that reward is halved. Currently, the reward is now 3.125 bitcoin. If you picture what is happening, you can see that supply is diminishing, and 19 million of the 21 million supply is already released. This makes an interesting dynamic because we have an asset that we know has a fixed supply, and that supply release is shrinking.

This has created an interesting price dynamic where as more people understand the scarcity, and ability to send it across the internet without a bank, the value in dollar terms has skyrocketed. Currently 1 bitcoin is worth £107,000. That value is entirely self-discovery. The supply and demand of bitcoin on Exchanges (like Coinbase, a website to buy and sell Bitcoin) sets the price, and the market is getting very very interested in Bitcoin.



- Modern Day Serfdom
    - Taxes are 50%
    - Separation of Money and State
    - A vote out of the FIAT system


- Signs it is happening
    - Iran Mining Bitcoin
    - ETFs
    - Stores accept Bitcoin
    - Bitcoin treasury companies
    - BTC Prague
    - The world is a math game

- Concerns
    - Future Fiefdoms
    - Declining House Prices?
    - Loans get more expensive as things deflate?
    - Self Control

- Further Reading
    - Books
    - Podcasts
    - News